The Structural Transformation of African and Asian Agriculture and Rural Spaces (STAAARS+) Fellows program, under the USAID Feed the Future Innovation Lab for Food Security Policy Research, Capacity and Influence (PRCI), is a collaboration between Cornell University, Michigan State University (MSU) and the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) to advance rigorous, policy-oriented food security research on topics of inclusive agricultural and rural transformation, development of healthy food systems and enhanced resilience at individual, household, national and regional levels in Africa and Asia. The goal of the program is to build capacity for effective policy research within African and Asian policy research organizations in order for those research institutions to continue to create research capacity beyond the life of PRCI and the STAAARS+ program. STAAARS+ teams are selected through a competitive process and paired with mentors at Cornell, IFPRI or MSU, with whom they will jointly author a paper on a topic of mutual interest that fits within PRCI’s broad research priorities. STAAARS+ will support the development of research findings publishable in high-quality, peer-reviewed journals; facilitate access to policy outreach networks and policy engagement materials; provide professional development training; build fellows’ international research networks; and support teams’ participation in scientific and policy conferences. The first cohort of STAAARS+ teams was selected in 2020 and a second cohort began in 2021. This request for proposal (RFP) marks the beginning of selection for the third cohort of teams. This call is open for teams of two to three early career African or Asian researchers currently working for eligible policy research institutions based in sub-Saharan Africa or Asia. Prospective STAAARS+ teams are invited to develop proposals in the following thematic areas: The deadline to submit a concept proposal is March 15, 2022, at 11:59 p.m. EDT.  Applicants should submit their completed proposals via the STAAARS+ online application. Accepted applicants will be notified by early May 2022 and are expected to begin remote collaboration with their mentor and be prepared to join launch activities immediately upon acceptance. Any questions about the application process or program should be directed to staaars_plus@cornell.edu. Learn more on the RFP page.