Co-author: Martin Bwalya Martin Bwalya is ag director, Knowledge Management and Programme Evaluation (KMPE) at the African Union Development Agency-New Partnership for Africa’s Development (AUDA-NEPAD). The pace of research in the field of genome editing — understanding, modifying and altering gene function — has quickly accelerated in the past 10 years. The first novel methods — zinc finger nuclease (ZFN), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALEN) and meganucleases — made it quicker and easier to modify genes. This was followed by CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing, with improved precision, speed and flexibility, and the potential to change the field of plant breeding, improve food security and stay a step ahead of climate change. Yet, due to policy and regulatory uncertainty around the world and some technical obstacles, very few products have attained commercialization, indicating a lack of follow-through on the incredible depth and breadth of research and investment. And in regions where CRISPR/Cas9 could have perhaps the greatest impact, like Africa, scientists are engaging but not fully participating due to policy incoherence as well as technical and the usually mind-set barriers. We are posing two questions: Why All the Excitement? For all the promise of the technology, we have to consider that the promise remains unfulfilled. Only two products from editing have attained any kind of commercial scale — a soybean in the United States with a higher quality oil and a tomato in Japan with heart-healthy nutrition. The major challenges: Another technical challenge is molecular characterization and genomics. Quality genetic sequence data is necessary to identify targets across varieties. This capability needs to be established for the under-utilized crops and made accessible to researchers everywhere. But, as with cowpea transformation, rapid progress is possible. Until progress is made on these challenges, genome editing will remain in the domain of western scientists and China, with very few products reaching the commercialization phase. Delivering on the Promise For More Detailed Information, Please See: Jenkins, D., Dobert, R., Atanassova, A. and Pavely, C. 2021. “Impacts of the regulatory environment for gene editing on delivering beneficial products.” In Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology — Plant, 57, 609-626. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11627-021-10201-4. Karavolias, N.G., Horner, W., Abugu, M.N. and Evanega, S.N. 2021. “Application of Gene Editing for Climate Change in Agriculture.” Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems, 5. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2021.685801/full. Massel, K.S., Lam, Y., Wong, A.C.S., Hickey, L.T., Borrell, A.K. and Godwin, I.D. 2021. “Hotter, drier, CRISPR: the latest edit on climate change.” Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 134, 1691-1709. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122-020-03764-0.