Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOs) are member-owned, democratically run, local financial service providers that play a critical role in the financial lives of farmers across sub-Saharan Africa. Farmers comprise 52% of members among the 176 government-regulated, deposit-taking SACCOs in Kenya. Many rural SACCOs started as farmer cooperatives or maintain close links with farmer groups that aggregate their produce for (usually cash-based) sales to agribusinesses. As such, SACCOs often have access to extensive data on their members’ agricultural production and sales. Most other financial service providers lack such community integration and remain reluctant to serve farmers — particularly geographically dispersed smallholders with limited or no land, collateral, formally documented income or credit history. As a result, millions of Kenyan farmers prefer to work with SACCOs and rely heavily on them for financial services that are key to their livelihoods. Despite SACCOs’ proximity and close relationship with their members, it is still expensive to deliver frequent, small-scale financial services to widely dispersed farmers. Moreover, the farmers themselves confront high transaction costs — leading them to withdraw their savings all at once, for example, rather than travel frequently to the SACCO to withdraw small amounts as needed. With the rise of digital financial technology, or “fintech,” SACCOs now have an opportunity to improve their efficiency and transparency while also leveraging valuable farmer transactional data that has otherwise sat idle with the farmer cooperatives. Stakeholders seeking to increase rural financial inclusion should consider the role, potential and needs of SACCOs to expand the reach of digital financial and other services through their trusted, grassroots farmer networks. In an effort to enhance smallholder farmers’ access to finance, the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) partnered with Amtech Technologies Limited beginning in May 2018 to support the development of an automated credit scoring (ACS) application that enables farmers to access SACCO loans through their mobile phones. Amtech had already been developing information and communications technology (ICT) solutions for farmer cooperatives, including: EasyMa for farm produce intake by various value chain suppliers; EasySACCO, a core banking system for SACCOs; and Farm Level Management Data (FLMD) to enable farmer data profiles that fulfill know-your-customer regulations. With a grant from AGRA, Amtech developed a machine learning algorithm that bridges these three applications (EasyMa, EasySACCO and FLMD) to access and analyze up-to-date farmer data. Amtech’s cloud-based, data-sharing application then employs automated decision-making tools with SACCO-defined criteria to allocate farmer credit scores and approve loans according to defined credit limits. SACCO members are notified of their qualified credit limit via SMS messages and can apply for loans by dialing their SACCO’s Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) code on their mobile phone. Loan funds are disbursed within seconds to the farmer’s mobile wallet for immediate use. As of December 2020, this plug-and-play, cloud-based, data-sharing ACS had been implemented in 88 farmer-based SACCOs that are active in staple food, dairy, tea and coffee value chains in Kenya. The ACS has resulted in substantial gains in efficiency for both SACCOs and their members. Outcomes of this investment include: Over the course of the ACS design and implementation, AGRA and Amtech have collected a number of observations and lessons learned to guide ongoing innovation and scale-up: As local, self-managed mutual interest groups, rural SACCOs have long played a central role in the lives and livelihoods of low-income farmers. Their loyal member networks represent meaningful scale in hard-to-reach areas, and their farm-level data presents a key to risk management for agricultural finance. As the financial inclusion sector looks for ways to ensure that the exclusion of rural smallholder farmers is not exacerbated by a digital divide, fostering SACCOs’ participation in the digital finance revolution can be a powerful step. Investments in digitization of SACCO operations, such as farm-level data collection, automated credit scoring, loan approval and transactions, hold promise for widespread uptake of digitally enabled financial and nonfinancial services. Equipping SACCOs with cutting-edge digital tools will reinforce sustainable service delivery and result in far-reaching impacts on farmers and the rural economy.