Shocks can be particularly harmful to small-scale agricultural producers’ livelihoods. This, in turn, can make affording nutritious food all the more challenging. We have seen this during the pandemic; the biggest threat to food security and nutrition has not come from disruptions to food availability, but from the often severe reductions in poor households’ economic access to food. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), a shock that reduces incomes by one-third will put healthy diets out of reach for 1 billion people, in addition to the 3 billion people who already cannot afford healthy diets. Countries may be affected differently by such shocks, depending on how much of the population already cannot afford a healthy diet and how much of it is at risk, as shown in the figure below. Why is this relevant to small-scale agricultural producers? Nearly half of the world’s population, including four out of five people living below the poverty line, live in rural areas.  Social protection programs are an important tool to ensure access to healthy diets. Such programs can help low-income farming households adopt more profitable, but also riskier, economic activities and provide an alternative to negative coping strategies in case of shocks. They can be tailored to the four broad categories of countries shown in the figure. Productive support programs are, likewise, helpful to small-scale agricultural producers. These are highly complementary to social protection programs and allow small-scale agricultural producers to benefit from logistical support, production innovations, inclusive governance of food supply chains, sustainable production practices, risk management tools and crop insurance schemes. Key components of productive support programs that promote small-scale agricultural producers’ resilience involve: For more information, please see the following recent publications by FAO: The State of Food and Agriculture 2021. “Making agrifood systems more resilient to shocks and stresses.” “Ensuring economic access to healthy diets during times of crisis.” FAO Agricultural Development Economics Policy Brief, No. 43.