Help USAID and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) assess the implications of artificial intelligence (AI) and automation on employment and inclusive economic development in agri-food systems. As the technology behind AI and machine learning (ML) advances and the potential advantages continue to grow, much remains unknown on the long-term implications AI and ML will have on employment and inclusive economic development in agri-food systems in lower- and middle-income countries. Various studies conducted by global consulting firms predict a 14%-16% increase in gross domestic product (GDP) growth as a result of AI, with a significantly higher expected benefit for developed economies. With increased interest and investment in AI, the automation revolution appears to be driven and owned primarily by a small group of multinational companies, governments and universities. By understanding who is likely to gain and who is likely to be left out, donors and governments can develop more responsible and inclusive programming that considers how these technologies will translate onto agri-food systems of USAID Feed the Future priority countries and BMGF focus regions. The potential risks of AI bias and opacity of models have already been documented by USAID in Reflecting the Past, Shaping the Future: Making AI Work for International Development. What has not yet been studied are the effects of an AI-powered global economy on both agri-food systems and those who possess the least ownership in those technologies. Insights into this will enable forward looking, responsible and inclusive programming for lower- and middle-income countries. To help address these challenges, the USAID Bureau for Resilience and Food Security and the BMGF Agricultural Development program are working with the Digital for Resilience and Food Security buy-in to the Digital Frontiers project to provide USAID, BMGF, partners and local stakeholders with a better understanding of the likely impacts of AI and automation on agri-food systems in the countries where USAID and BMGF work. Digital Frontiers has released a request for applications (RFA) to conduct this assessment, as well as provide practical recommendations on how to promote more inclusive and open design, ownership and uptake of these technologies. Who Should Apply? DAI is looking for qualified organizations with: More information on qualifications and how to apply can be found on the RFA. Applications are due March 3, 2022, to DigitalFrontiers@dai.com. Questions regarding the RFAs are due February 17, 2022, to DigitalFrontiers@dai.com. If you are interested in receiving updates and further communications regarding this RFA, please email DigitalFrontiers@dai.com.