If a stable global climate is to be attained, agriculture, notably agriculture in the developing world, will play a pivotal role.  Research and development are critical to meeting these and other challenges, as well as to grasping opportunities. Why are emissions from agriculture in focus? There are three big reasons: Why are developing countries crucial? More than 70% of AFOLU emissions come from the global south, representing about 15% of total greenhouse gas emissions (once again, too big to ignore). Globally, land use change represents not quite half of all AFOLU emissions, with agricultural expansion being the major driver of this component. From 2003 to 2019, cropland area increased by 9% worldwide; however, this expansion took place almost entirely in the developing world with Africa and South America representing not quite two-thirds of the total expansion in area. Enteric fermentation and rice cultivation are, as noted above, sources of methane. They are also substantial contributors to global emissions, accounting for about 34% of AFOLU emissions, or about 7% of global total emissions. Most of these emissions emanate from the developing world. The way forward A key point is that reducing emissions is only one element of the many challenges confronting food systems. With respect to livelihoods, the food system is currently the world’s largest “employer”. However, for billions of people, earning a livelihood in the food system translates into very low and precarious incomes, with women and disadvantaged groups often more vulnerable. To achieve acceptable and resilient livelihoods, we must continue to leverage the demonstrated ability of food systems to improve livelihoods, as well as inclusion, for billions of people. With respect to natural habitats, food systems drive about 60% of global biodiversity loss. As emphasized at the recently concluded United Nations Food Systems Summit, we want a far more nature-positive food system. With respect to nutrition, we now know that about 3 billion people cannot afford a healthy diet. Hence, the expectations of the food system over the course of the next 30 years are high: shift from a major source of emissions to a major sink, improve livelihoods for billions, shift from the largest driver of biodiversity loss to nature-positive status and produce not just the calories but also the micronutrients and dietary diversity that constitute a healthy diet — at an affordable price. All of this must be accomplished in the context of a rapidly changing climate. Meeting these high expectations requires a large and broad-based innovation push that is based on evidence and research. Research-based innovations were an essential piece of the reductions in poverty, hunger and malnutrition of the past 50 years and will be equally important for meeting today’s challenges. This included institutional innovations. Just as a very low emissions power system will not emerge with 20th century policies and institutions that were tailored to an era of fossil fuels, new policies, innovative governance arrangements and reformed institutions in AFOLU and food systems are indispensable. To give one example related to emissions, current policies, institutions and governance mechanisms will not succeed in channeling the large public and private investments in AFOLU and food systems required to transform the sector from a major emitter to a major sink. In sum, alongside developing and exploiting technical innovations, such as gene editing, distributed solar power and digital applications, the innovation push called for the above needs to include innovations in policy, governance and institutions.