Bangladesh has made great strides in mechanizing many aspects of agricultural production since the early 1980s, when manual labor and animal power did all the work. To replace the large number of draught animals lost in the 1988 flood quickly, the government withdrew brand and testing restrictions on the import of agricultural machinery and allowed the duty-free import of irrigation engines, power tillers and spare parts. As a result, thousands of low-cost power tillers and irrigation engines were imported, making possible the rapid expansion of mechanization of primary tillage, irrigation and threshing. By the mid-2000s, draught animals in use earlier had been replaced by 300,000 power tillers. Growing labor costs and shortages of supply, particularly during the rice harvest period, are now driving a demand for mechanized rice transplanting and harvesting services. The private sector has responded to this through the aggressive promotion and sale of rice transplanters and mini combine harvesters, and the government has responded through the provision of subsidies on the sale price of a range of machines, including combine harvesters and rice transplanters. Despite this, adoption of combine harvesters and rice transplanters has been slower than expected, and many crop production activities still continue to be done by hand. To contribute to addressing these issues, the USAID Feed the Future Bangladesh Cereal Systems Initiative for South Asia Mechanization and Extension Activity (CSISA-MEA), in partnership with Bangladesh Agricultural University (BAU), held a workshop for agricultural mechanization value chain actors on “Agricultural Mechanization in Bangladesh — The Future” in Dhaka on March 21-22, 2022. Its purpose was to review progress made with agricultural mechanization, the impact this has had on rural society in Bangladesh and how the increase in the availability of rural labor force will support the industrialization of the Bangladesh economy. Within this context, the workshop aimed to identify: The workshop was attended by 297 participants from a wide range of sectors, including agricultural machinery-based light engineering enterprises, machinery marketing companies, machinery service-providing entrepreneurs, public and private sector finance institutions, microfinance institutions (MFIs), representatives from the Department of Agricultural Extension, national agricultural research stations, the Ministry of Industries, international development organizations, USAID and universities. It was held over two days, starting with an inaugural session attended by the Honorable Minister Dr. Muhammad Abdur Razzaque, member of Parliament, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of the Peoples’ Republic of Bangladesh. This was followed by sessions titled: The full workshop agenda and workshop presentations can be accessed through the CSISA website: https://csisa.org/agricultural-mechanization-in-bangladesh-the-future/. Progress with mechanizing agriculture in Bangladesh Spare parts availability and quality Skills training Agricultural machinery service provision and technology adoption Access to finance Female and youth entrepreneurs